This interview with Father Dennis Farkasvalve
took place on November 20, 1982, at the Cistercian
Abbey of Our Lady of Dallas in Irving, Texas. The
interviewer is Michael Burns. This interview
concerns Father Dennis' interpretation of the
Hungarian Revolt of October of 1956, at which he
was present.
Father Dennis Farkasvalve, How old were you when
the revolution in Hungary started? 20
years old and I was in third year of law school at the
University of Budapest. Okay, could you explain
to me your role in the revolution? I don't think
that I played a role, although I might say that I
have done exactly what the hundreds and thousands
of university students and high school students
did. Namely, I participated in the first large
demonstration that has been the beginning of the
revolution. And later on I also participated in a
few more gatherings. One particular gathering
that was at the university itself, at which
certain decisions were made and a new leadership
was elected. But I have even received arms at the
university, but after about half an hour of
thinking it over, I decided that I'm not going to
participate in the fighting. I felt that there was
actually no chance of success, and I did not feel
that there was any point of risking more lives.
Okay. I'd like to talk about the feelings and the
moods leading up to the revolution. well the
feelings and the moods go back probably to the
middle of the summer of 1956
there was an erosion of the terror system in
Hungary and also there was a feeling that the party
itself was divided and the liberal wing liberal in
the sense of asking for more individual rights,
more democracy in the country, emerged. And as a
consequence, the school year has started in a mood
quite different from previous school years. The
well-known burial of Laszlo Roik was the first
event which has seen some sporadic
demonstrations in the city of Budapest, but
information about it came only through rumors.
And then in the middle of October, in the city of
Szeged, which is the second largest city of
Hungary, about 100 miles from Budapest, a city
with a university, the students have started a
movement
that was supposed to be the
substitute movement for the communist youth
movement. So, maybe very similarly to what is
going on now in Poland, that a trade union
organization free trade union organization
wants to substitute for the communist-run trade
union
movement. In Hungary, the youth movement and the
movement of university
students was supposed to replace the party-run
youth movement that was of course corrupt and
totally under the influence of the party
leadership. Now, this was an organization that
tried to spread the demands of the youth among the
students, demands for more democracy, a new
government, and more freedom. Two days before I
think two days before the
revolution itself, so on the 21st of October, if I
remember correctly, a delegation from the
University of Szeged came to our university and
gave a short speech expressing and describing the
goals for which this new youth movement started.
The professors, who at the law school were all
members of the party, did not know really how to
react, and they obviously did not receive any
orders from the party what to do about this new
youth movement, which obviously has had some
support from the party itself. You might also
remember that at the same time, in Poland, there
was unrest in Gdansk. And so this youth movement
has called for a protest march, or actually for a
sympathy march on behalf of the Polish workers.
That was the
excuse or motive under which the large
demonstration of October the 23rd, 1956 was
called. And that demonstration turned into a
revolution. Okay. That demonstration was
announced, I think, a day early, on Tuesday the
22nd, and on Wednesday the 23rd, at 3 o'clock we
were supposed to be at the statue of Pateufi on the
shore of the Danube. And that's where I also showed
up, and our protest march started through the
whole city. Okay. In this, in the march in the
crowd, was it, in crowds, a lot, many times you get a
feeling of chaos or just heat of the moment? No, the
march was very well organized in the sense that it
was very orderly, and there were banners and
flags, banners identifying each group, and
actually there are three, four large
universities scattered in the city of Budapest.
So from each university, practically all
students gathered and in very orderly fashion
moved across the city to the posted goal of the
demonstration, the statue of Bem, General Bem was
a Polish general in the anti-Habsburg revolution
of 1848. And since this was a sympathy march for the
Polish, the idea was that we would all gather at the
statue of this Polish general, who 100 years or 130
years, 120 years earlier, helped the Hungarians
in their fight against the Austrians. now the
march was also in a way very ironically composed
because all the professors all the communists of
the university participated so obviously they
got from the party the order to partake in order to
keep it under control and in order to watch who is
doing the so-called provocations, that is, who is
going to start the anti-Soviet slogans. I
personally thought that all the slogans that were
shouted for more democracy and this sort of thing
was hogwash, till we finally reached, oh, maybe
three-quarters of the route on the bridge of St.
Margaret. passing from one side of the Danube to
the other, it was at that place that I started, that
I heard the first anti-Soviet slogan, and
honestly, my feeling was, now you're talking,
because that's the issue, when the famous
Russkikhaza, Russians go home, slogan started.
From then on, that has become the central issue of
the demonstration. In other words, that whatever
what was buried in everybody's heart the main
complaint and main problem of the country erupted
in the middle of the demonstration spontaneously
and at least my feeling was that it has erupted
spontaneously by the time we have reached the
square where the statue of General Bem stands the
university students picked up thousands of
workers
office and store personnel I mean people who
populated the streets and the offices and the
workplaces which we passed by we just picked up we
we have doubled or tripled our membership in other
words we just drew people out of their homes and
offices and workplaces, and the whole city ended
up being on the streets. So the university
students were maybe just a match to the fire. Okay.
Speaking of university students, it's been said
that the Patafi Club was a group of intellectuals
that started thinking of this and Again, could you
describe your involvement or your... The Patufi
Club was a group of dissident writers starting to
meet during the summer and starting to work out a
platform which of course was pretty much along the
lines of left-wing or even socialist or you might
say communist
ideology and yet they try to formulate a new way of
socialism which would be catering to the national
feelings of the country would be for more freedom
human rights or individual freedom and more
independence in economic planning. The platform
being formulated by intellectuals was something
I think utopian and as opposed to what is going on in
Poland today, very much based on an intellectual
leadership rather than a trade union
organization so led by workers. I think a lot of
workers participated, but as a second step. The
leadership element was left-wing writers, but
left-wing writers who disagreed with the
policies
of the- or the official leadership of the party.
And that shows again that there was a cracked party
that allowed these developments. The party
leadership has been torn in two ever since the
death of Stalin, which was in 1953. So, the
prehistory of the revolution is probably the
internal confusion of the party which has allowed
the emergence of a young, more liberal wing within
the party itself that has appealed
on to the workers and especially the youth in order
to change the system, change the internal
composition of the leadership in Hungary. They
did not realize that the majority of the
Hungarians did not want communism at all. In other
words, this movement of the patriotic club has
flipped into a nationwide revolution against the
communist system as such, and against the
Russians in particular. Could you tell me about
the Tearing Down of Stalin statue? Were you there?
The statue of Stalin, I think, was an eyesore and a
symbol of the suppression, for sure. It stands in
the middle of what is called the city park, and at
considerable distance from my home. After the
demonstration at the statue of General Vem, the
swollen crowd on the streets took different
directions. I stayed with the group that went to
the parliament and demanded that the previous
prime minister, Imre Nagy, who was somehow the
symbol of the more liberal element in the party,
would talk to us. So I stayed with that group, while
other people went to the statue of Stalin, and a
third group went to the radio station, the
official radio station. Now, the group at the
Stalin statue has worked a couple of hours in order
to demolish the statue, but when the statue was on
the ground, it was called for celebration, so the
statue was dragged all across the city, and
finally got deposited across the National
Theater in a side street in order not to block
traffic. Two or three days later, maybe it was more
than two or three days later, I also paid my
respects to the broken statue of Stalin. There was
still a standing crowd around it and people were
chiseling little souvenir pieces from the statue
for themselves. little fragments of the statue of
Stalin afterwards. But I was unable to get one
myself, but I've seen the statue and the sort of
bonfire around it a few days after it was torn down.
Okay, Father Dennis, could you describe the
massacre in Parliament Square? The massacre in
Parliament Square I think took place on the 25th of
October. After a lull following the
demonstrations and the first fights on the
streets. The first fight, really, first armed
exchange between secret police and the
revolutionaries took place at the radio, not at
the parliament. And that was still the night of the
23rd. By the way, very few people know that this
first fight was broadcast on the radio, because
they forgot to turn off the microphones in the
radio station, so that for about half an hour, and I
listened to it through the radio, you could hear,
besides classical music, shots and exchange of
shots. For about half an hour it was transmitted on
the radio. to the whole country. That's how the
country has learned everywhere about the
revolution, that, you know, there was
pandemonium in the radio station itself. But that
was the 23rd night. Two days later, I think in the
morning, at around 10 or 11 o'clock in the morning,
a new demonstration was announced and I have seen
the people, at least one large group, moving
through the fashionable street, actually in
downtown Budapest, where I also lived, and I
accompanied them for
quite a while we had some side demonstrations on
the way. But rumors said that armed resistance
will wait for us at Parliament, so I returned home.
Again, my position and the position of my family
was that precipitation of the revolution into
armed conflict will only foretell defeat. There
was no hope of coming out victorious from an armed
confrontation with the Soviets. That was the
belief that I held and my family also held. So, we
promised each other not to get involved in the
fights. So, I came home. Was this a minority view?
This was the, I must say, the intelligent view, the
less passionate and more realistic view among the
circles of my friends. In any case, I went home and
first a phone call came from friends telling that
there is a massacre in on the square in front of the
parliament then two boys boyfriends of my sister
arrived to our home who personally came from there
and escaped with their lives and ran to our home we
were not too far away from the from the Parliament
and they describe what has happened they were
caught in the crossfire on the bridge a bridge that
has been just a temporary bridge across the Danube
in front of the Parliament And right after the
revolution, the bridge was demolished. But these
guys were hiding on the bridge and surviving the
massacre between the columns of the bridge, which
must have been eerie. In any case, these people
were eyewitnesses. And while they were still in
our home, we were able to watch from our windows We
were on the sixth floor of a large apartment
complex and we were able to watch on the street
truckloads of corpses being brought. from the
parliament square obviously to the morgue and
that was eerie those corpses were just every
everyday people just thrown on the trucks and
being carried with incredible speed through the
streets and they were not even covered so It was
probably the most scariest thing that I've seen in
those weeks. I'd like to ask you about the radio
involvement. It's the Voice of America Radio Free
Europe. Okay, well, of course, Free Europe played
a very important part in our lives. You must
realize that starting in 1948, the country became
completely isolated from both the West and the
truth. So, we did not receive information about
international events, but through the
censorship of the party. So Radio Free Europe was a
very important source of information. The
broadcasts were seriously disturbed,
yet it was possible to listen to Free Europe. and a
lot of people picked up the information from Free
Europe. Now, Free Europe was considered by most of
my contemporaries and friends as interesting
and helpful, but irresponsible at the same time,
making the West appear to us as an absolute
paradise which is denied to us. Also, the
readiness of America in the Cold War to strike at
the Russians was overplayed. So there was a
popular view widely spread all over the country
that in case there is armed conflict between the
people and the Russians in any of the satellite
countries, there would be American
intervention. This has been so widely popular,
held even by the leaders, even by Imre Nagy, the
prime minister, that when the Russians on
November the 4th have started their second major
offensive against the revolution and have
completely run over Hungary, the last messages to
the UN included appeals on paratroopers. Now I
wonder what kind of paratroopers they would be
would have expected. Of course Imre Nagy was
talking to the UN not to the US, but in the minds of
everybody else we were actually waiting for
paratroopers who actually helped from heaven,
actually from the sky, to be dropped over us. I did
not believe in it personally, but a lot of people
thought that American intervention was the only
answer, the only logical answer to expect. And I am
sure that a lot of people in this country thought
that an American intervention was in order. So the
disappointment was not only ours or that of my
contemporaries at the time, but a lot of people
here thought that letting down the Hungarian
Revolution was the wrong decision by Eisenhower.
In my opinion, there was no chance for
intervention for America, and sad as it appears to
be, I
don't think I was terribly surprised.
Frustrated, yes, but surprised, no. So, do you
believe the US, through Radio Free Europe, helped
to inspire the revolution? The US, by the Cold War
alone, has certainly maintained the impression
in Hungary that we had powerful allies in our
struggle against the Soviet, allies that were
ready to fight in case that was necessary. I don't
think that the Hungarian public was sufficiently
educated, and Free Europe didn't do the
education, in the power play
that has just started called coexistence. The
word coexistence was just coined in the year in
which the Hungarian Revolution took place. Sadly
enough, this
is possibly not very well known in this country
anymore, in 1955, less than a year earlier than the
Hungarian Revolution, the Austrian state was
established. That was the only time since Second
World War that the Russians have ever stepped
back, namely pulled out from a country. Austria
came about by
I think an agreement packed between the four
powers to withdraw troops from Austria and
establish a neutral state and the Russians who
occupied one-fourth of Austria have also agreed
to draw to pull back now that in that year the the
Western powers really made the decision of
sealing the gains, the territorial gains of the
Soviet after World War II, and our fate was also
sealed, except we were not told about that, that
with the establishment of the Austrian state, and
blocking the entrance with the neutral state to
the West, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, and Poland
were finally and definitely given over to the
interest sphere of the Soviet. And that has
happened a year before the Hungarian Revolution.
Again, my parents, who probably were a little
better educated than the average, were terribly
aware of what the establishment of Austria has
meant. When that was celebrated in Radio Vienna by
the, in the opera of Vienna, There was a great
celebration and it was transmitted by radio. My
parents literally wept while listening to it on
radio. They knew that Austria has come about and
Hungary got lost in that, in that, on that day. So
we, we were not kidding ourselves, but Free Europe
did not
educate the public, and probably for good
purpose, about this switch in Western policy. So,
that's what I think about it. During the fighting
itself, did you ever hear rumors that the U.S. was
on the way? And, I mean, people, it was said they
were running through the streets yelling that,
you know, No, no, no, there were rumors about
readiness of certain volunteer groups in Austria
and in Germany, and that was, those rumors were
actually well supported by facts. There were
private groups ready to come, and of course the
major problem would have been
to cross any one of the neutral or communist
countries. Hungary was not contiguous with any
member of NATO. But Hungary is contiguous as the
result of Second World War with the Soviet Union.
The Soviets have established the borders in such a
way that they have direct access to all the
satellite countries. They don't have to cross
another country in order to reach Romania,
Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Poland, or even
Bulgaria. And so it was very questionable how they
would get through anybody. There were rumors,
however, if I'm not mistaken, that Eisenhower
decided to come himself to Budapest. Whether or
not that rumor had anything behind it. factual, I
don't know, but of course Eisenhower didn't come.
The person who came was, and these are very famous
people, the person who came was Brezhnev, who at
the time was nobody, and ominously enough, the
Hungarian ambassador, actually the Russian
ambassador to Hungary at the time was